---
title: "Palaeogenomic Investigation Of 50,000 Years Of The Human Oral Microbiome In The Iberian Mediterranean"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2018-09-05-talk-1
venue: "EAA2018,"
date: 2019-09-08
location: "Barcelona, Spain"
---

**EAA2018**: I gave an talk at the European Association of Archaeologists conference, entitled:
"Palaeogenomic Investigation Of 50,000 Years Of The Human Oral Microbiome In The Iberian Mediterranean".

This was presented in the session: "EXPLORING THE POTENTIAL OF DENTAL CALCULUS 
FOR RECONSTRUCTING THE PAST" organised by Robert C. Power, Shira Guy Arieh, 
Cynthianne Spiteri and Domingo Carlos Salazar-Garcia.

*Abstract* The bacterial communities that live on the human body play an 
important role in health and disease during the lifetime of an individual.
Furthermore, research on these ‘microbiota’ in modern populations have shown 
that cultural behaviour influences the composition of these communities, with 
subsequent effects on the host. Recent findings of well preserved endogenous 
microbial DNA in archaeological dental calculus has provided insights into the 
biology and cultural behaviour of past individuals.

Previously, it has been argued that agricultural and industrial dietary 
transitions may have had a major impact on the makeup of microbiome communities 
in European human populations. However, these findings were based on a small 
number of geographically dispersed samples and focused on PCR amplification of 
a single bacterial marker gene. To control for geographic and inter-individual
variation of the oral microbiota, as well as potential amplification biases, we 
have generated shotgun metagenomic DNA sequence data from over 100 dental 
calculus samples focusing on populations from a single region, the Iberian 
Mediterranean and its inland area of influence, which chronologically spans 
from the Palaeolithic to the present day. We present results on the genetic 
preservation of dental calculus over this interval and test for associations 
between patterns in the oral microbial communities and human cultural periods.
