---
title: "Reconstruction of Oral Microbiomes from Extinct and Extant Anthropoids through Ancient DNA"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2018-09-20-talk-1
venue: "ISBA8"
date: 2018-09-20
location: "Jena, Germany"
---

**EAA2018**: I gave an talk at the 8th International Symposium on Biomolecular 
Archaeologyconference, entitled: "Reconstructi on of oral microbiomes from 
extinct and extant anthropoids through ancient DNA".

This was presented in the session: "Microbiomes".

*Abstract* While modern microbiome research has shown the importance of our 
microbial communities in health and disease, research has tended to focus on 
the gut microbiome of either Western industrialised societies or captive 
animals. Recent discoveries in the field of archaeogenetics have revealed 
dental calculus from skeletal remains as a rich source of well-preserved 
bacterial DNA. In contrast to sampling from live individuals, dental calculus 
from archaeological remains presents an opportunity to less-invasively study 
the oral microbiome from a wider diversity of species and populations.

We present results of a total over 3.5 billion shotgun DNA sequencing reads 
from ancient and modern dental calculus from over 90 hominids, including 
gorillas (29), chimps (20) and humans (45), as well as 14 Neanderthals from the 
Late Pleistocene and 5 New World monkeys. We show initial metagenomic and 
genomic analysis of similarities and differences in the oral plaque microbiome 
at different stages of anthropoid evolution. While preservation is variable in 
archaeological samples, dental calculus from the Late Pleistocene can still 
yield authentic ancient DNA attributable to known microbial taxa found in the 
modern human oral cavity. Expanding our knowledge of the diversity of the human 
microbiome through time and space will be important in understanding the deep 
relationship between hosts and their microbial communities.