---
title: "Reconstruction of Oral Microbiomes From Extinct and Extant Anthropoids through Ancient DNA"
collection: posters
type: "Poster"
permalink: /talks/2018-07-11-poster-1
venue: "SMBE18"
date: 2019-07-11
location: "Yokohama, Japan"
---

**SMBE18**: I presented a poster at SMBE18 Japan, entitled:
"Reconstruction of Oral Microbiomes From Extinct and Extant Anthropoids through 
Ancient DNA".

*Abstract* While modern microbiome research has shown the importance of our 
microbial communities in health and disease, research has tended to focus on 
the gut microbiome of either Western industrialised societies or captive 
animals. Recent discoveries in the field of archaeogenetics have revealed 
dental calculus from skeletal remains as a rich source of well-preserved 
bacterial DNA. In contrast to sampling from live individuals, dental calculus 
from archaeological remains presents an opportunity to ‘non-invasively’ study 
the oral microbiome from a wider diversity of species and populations. 

 We present results of a total over 3.5 billion shotgun DNA sequencing reads 
 from ancient and modern dental calculus from over 90 hominids, including 
 gorillas (29), chimps (20) and humans (45), as well as 14 Neanderthals from 
 the Late Pleistocene and 5 New World monkeys.  We will show initial 
 (meta)genomic analysis of similarities and differences in the oral plaque 
 microbiome at different stages of anthropoid evolution. While preservation is 
 variable in archaeological samples, dental calculus from the Late Pleistocene 
 can still yield authentic ancient DNA attributable to known microbial taxa 
 found in the modern human oral cavity. Expanding our knowledge of the 
 diversity of the human microbiome through time and space will be important in 
 understanding the deep relationship between hosts and their microbial 
 communities.

A copy of this poster can be found 
[here](https://github.com/jfy133/jfy133.github.io/blob/master/files/JAFY_SMBE18_Poster.pdf).
